his first appearance in public, clad himself in a richly-wrought 
cloak of Anglo-Saxon embroidery, and his secretary,. 
William of Poictiers, states that " the English women are 
eminently skilful with the needle and in weaving." 

The excellence of the English work was maintained as 
time went on, and a proof of this is found in an anecdote 
preserved by Matthew of Paris.'* " xVbout this time (1246) 
the Lord Pope (Innocent IV.) having observed the 
ecclesiastical ornaments of some Englishmen, such as 
choristers' copes and mitres, were embroidered in gold 
thread after a very desirable fashion, asked where these 
works were made, and received in answer, in England. 
' Then,' said the Pope, ' England is surely a garden of 
delights for us. It is truly a never-failing spring, and there,, 
where many things abound, much may be extracted.' 
Accordingly, the same Lord Pope sent sacred and sealed 
briefs to nearly all the abbots of the Cistercian order 
established in England, requesting them to have forthwith 
forwarded to him those embroideries in gold which he preferred 
to all others, and with which he wished to adorn his chasuble 
and choral cope, as if these objects cost them nothing," an 
order which, adds the chronicler, " was sufficiently pleasing 
to the merchants, but the cause of many persons detesting 
him for his covetousness." 

Perhaps the finest examples of the opus anglicanum extant 
are the cope and maniple of St. Cuthbert, taken from his 
coffin in the Cathedral of Durham, and now preserved in 
the Chapter library. One side of the maniple is of gold lace 
stitched on, worked apparently on a parchment pattern. 
The Syon Monastery cope, in the Victoria and Albert 
Museum, is an invaluable example of English needlework of 
the thirteenth century. " The greater portion of its design is 
worked in a chain-stitch (modern tambour or crochet), 
especially in the faces of the figures, where the stitch 
begins in the centre, say, of a cheek, and is then worked in 
a spiral, thus forming a series of circular lines. The texture- 
so obtained is then, by means of 'a hot, small and round- 
knobbed iron, pressed into indentations at the centre of each 
spiral, and an effect of relief imparted to it. 
